the war on Gaza comes on the 106th
anniversary of the balfor Declaration
which changed the lives of Palestinians
forever so what was that declaration
well for centuries the Ottoman Empire
controlled Palestine until it was
conquered in 1917 by advancing British
troops during the first World War the
British foreign secretary Arthur balfor
wrote a letter to a prominent member of
the British Jewish Community saying his
government was in favor of the
establishment in Palestine of a national
home for the Jewish
people well at that time only 8% of
palestine's population was Jewish the
letter also said nothing shall be done
which may Prejudice the civil and
religious rights of existing non-jewish
communities in Palestine but after the
war ended in 1918 the newly created
League of Nations mandated Palestine to
British control with the language of the
Bal for declaration written in 1948
after the second world war British
occupiers left Palestine the newly
formed United Nations declared the
creation of the state of Israel more
than
700,000 Palestinians lost their
land well Vincent fi is a former British
Consul General in Jerusalem he's also a
trustee for the Bal for project charity
which says its mission is to address the
UK's responsibility for peace and
Security in Israel and pal
joins me live from London good to have
you with us so do you agree with those
who say that it was the ball declaration
that laid the foundation for conflict in
the
region I believe that on this 106th um
anniversary of the Bala declaration that
declaration is still alive because its
impact is still with us and it has led
to conflict the document that you read
out uh the very short promise to the
Zionist leader in the UK um says two
things it says a Homeland for the Jewish
people but without prejudice to the
civil and religious rights of non-jewish
people which were the majority as you've
said um Britain's role in that time was
I would say a policy of
Deceit um the Bal for project charity
that you mentioned that I'm the trustee
of uh has a website with information
objective information about the British
role we focus on Britain the website is
bpo.org and one of my fellow trustees
has written a book which I commend to
your viewers called a policy of Deceit
because Britain promised the same land
to the Sharif of Mecca before promising
it to uh the leader of the Zionist
movement in the UK and and then during
the Mandate period the the only
consistent thing that Britain did was
effectively to
prevent Palestine becoming an
independent state for as long as there
was an Arab Palestinian majority there
in that's led to conflict and it gives
Britain a responsibility today to take a
lead as a government as a people to try
to ensure equality between Israelis and
Palestinians with Mutual Security the
idea that unilateral security can be
imposed by one people on another through
the occupation is wrong and it's being
proved to be wrong tragically as we
speak just want to pick up on something
you said there the the only effective
thing Britain did in that period was
preventing an independent state of
Palestine to emerge for as long as there
was still a Palestinian Arab majority
there there effectively what does that
mean denying Palestinians of having a
chance at State Hood
themselves this was in Imperial times
sadly and the Imperial Legacy is still
with us the method used by Britain in
that mandate period um was essentially
to flip and flop between um Sympathy for
the Jewish uh migrants immigrants
particularly at the time of the
Holocaust and frankly a lack of Sympathy
for the national aspirations of the
Palestinian Arab people and the outcome
was a mess Britain left a mess behind
and I feel no pride in that but turning
to now I think Britain has a responsib
ability a duty as a state as a
government to do several things to
recognize the state of Palestine which
it has failed to do uh Britain
recognized Israel as a state in 1950
long ago that recognition stands and
will not go away but the idea of
recognizing the state of Palestine as
more than 140 other states in the UN
have done is important it's important
symbolically it's more than important
symbolically it's important legally
because it means that the international
criminal court and the international
court of justice can rule on the
legality of the occupation uh 56 years
on from
1967 and can investigate alleged war
crimes in Gaza and in Israel both past
and present all right given that
everything you've just described there
in the process ultimately this was a
European colonial power promising to
give land to a movement which was
primarily comprised and led by European
non-natives to the land of
Palestine was this not setting the stage
for a colonial
project I called it Imperial uh the the
British uh themselves ourselves did not
colonize Palestine uh under our time
more and more Jewish migrants some
driven to Israel by the horrors of the
Holocaust came and as I said we flipped
and flopped at one stage uh Britain
prevented uh Jewish migrants from
Landing uh after World War II um in
order to try to keep some sort of uh
imperfect balance between the uh the
Jewish population and the
Palestinian in it over to what was
primarily a non-native movement that led
did it not to a policy of
colonizing I think that what we should
look at if I may say is look at now what
should the British government be doing
now it should be urging its Israeli uh
Ally to allow fuel medicine clean water
food into Gaza it should be urging
Israel to end Collective punishment of
the 2.3 million Palestinian people it
should be urging Hamas through
intermediaries like katar and Egypt to
release the more than 240 hostages
unconditionally we're all living under
the same God the lives of Palestinians
and Israelis are of equal value that
needs to be emphasized it needs to be
said by Israel's partners and it needs
to be said loudly and I would like that
to be said by Tony blinken when he gets
to uh Israel and the region uh tomorrow
uh may I also just add one of the point
which was mentioned in your earlier uh
reporting quite rightly the risk to
Palestinians in the West Bank of
displacement is very high more than
2,000 Palestinians have been displaced
since the beginning of this year by
settler violence and
the silence or even support of the
Israeli Army so what can we do about
that in our terms in the UK uh we can
write to our MPS we can try to exercise
our Democratic rights to protest but
also to propose an outcome after this
tragic war ends and that outcome has to
be
Mutual Security it has to be recognition
of the State of Palestine by Britain and
by Partners in the Commonwealth and in
the rest of Europe and it has to mean
that we end up in a situation where this
tragedy can never be repeated that means
Mutual Security but it also means parity
of
esteem parity of esteem from the West
for Palestinians and Israelis
and we don't have that
today all right thanks so much we'll
leave it
there thank you